Firstly on behalf of HDA let me say thank you to Heritage Lottery for giving us the
support we needed to deliver this series of podcasts about Tiger Bay.
And let me also say anything we say on here is not the responsibility or the opinion of
Heritage Lottery.
It's a community project and the community has a right to a voice and that is hopefully
what we're capturing.
But all of the podcasts will remain and we'll move to the People's Collection for Wales
at the end of this work.
They will remain live on the podcast for at least another nine months.
But the podcasts are intended to give you an idea of the people, the community, the
village that was Tiger Bay, Butetown, whatever you wanted to call it.
But it was a village of real people who worked really hard, who lived and died for Wales
in many, many regards.
They were all races, they were all faiths, they were all languages.
And any of the stories or any of the oral histories you've heard on here will continually
say about how they lived together in unity, shared each other's religious festivals,
each other's homes, each other's food.
However, that wasn't the case outside of the bay.
The rest of society, despite the contribution made in the First World War, which of course
as we said was followed by race riots against the people and later race riots against the
Chinese, despite that.
In the wars, people experienced overt racism and a policy that was never totally encapsulated
in law but became a reality.
Now I'm going to read you a few passages from a book by a man who I really wish we'd been
able to include in these podcasts.
Not simply because he was one of the few people who put pen to paper and put it in a couple
of really good books about Tiger Bay, but also because it's a terrible shame that he's
not with us anymore.
That man was Neil M.C. Sinclair who wrote the Tiger Bay story and a follow-up book called
Endangered Tiger, a Community Under Threat.
And few people knew more about the bay than Neil Sinclair.
Now the press attacked the people of Tiger Bay, generally with things they made up about
prostitution, about crimes, none of which was supported by any evidence.
But there wasn't, as far as I'm aware, a press complaints body then and anyway who would
have listened to the complaints from the residents of Tiger Bay.
But there was also a colour bar.
Now that's not mentioned much and you certainly won't see people talking about it generally
within society now, however it existed.
So let me read you an excerpt from someone who knew and who's, well, I value his opinion
immensely.
That's Neil Sinclair and this is from the Tiger Bay story.
In July of 1935 the following was published in the Western Mail.
Quote, hundreds of Arab and coloured seamen have settled in the city.
They construct their own places of worship.
They mate with the type of women who are willing to accept them because there are none of their
own kind to be hailed.
The coloured men who have come to dwell in our cities are being made to adopt the standards
civilisation they cannot be expected to understand.
There is no reason for sentimentality in this matter.
Let him who pleads the justice of the coloured man's settlement among us read the report's
references to venereal disease and the heavy toll of tuberculosis among our guests.
Many of them are citizens of the British Empire.
Many did fine work in the war.
Neither of these considerations should blind us to the plain fact they do not belong to
the social system we have evolved in these islands.
Despite the work of my grandmother, that's Neil Sinclair's grandmother, Agnes Headley,
she was merely one of the type of women who were willing to accept a black man and in
that system her daughter Beatrice was referred to as a, in quotes, half-caste.
Now at a time before my brother Leonard died, Beatrice and her best friend Katie Nathan,
two in quotes half-caste girls, decided on a day out uptown.
Let me explain here, uptown is outside the bay.
They put on their best clothes to go.
Of course Leonard, who wasn't quite two, had to be taken along.
There was rarely the convenience of babysitters back then in the 1930s, so babies were dressed
up and taken too.
Having spent a busy afternoon window shopping and otherwise enjoying themselves, the thought
of a nice cup of tea easily sprang to mind.
So they stopped at an Italian cafe in St Mary Street called Rabiotti.
They sat and they sat as waitresses continued to serve other customers who came in after
them so Beatrice called for the manager who promptly informed them that people like them
could not be served there.
Beatrice protested.
She and her friends were tired and not leaving until they were served.
Here we have a mother, a child and a friend, all born in Wales, being made to adopt a standard
of civilisation they cannot be expected to understand.
They were politely escorted from the premises by a policeman the manager had contacted outside
in St Mary Street.
The policeman explained it was the proprietor's prerogative if he chose not to serve them.
So in disgrace and indignation they went without their tea.
This apparently was the enforcement of the policy that declared that people like Beatrice,
Katie and poor little Leonard did not belong to the social system we have evolved in these
islands.
To maintain its barriers the aforementioned social system forged a nomenclature half-caste
out of British experience as a dominating empire with its attendant colonial regime.
Here we have a standard of civilisation that refuses to accept the children it has made.
The term half-caste is still used today in the media but it is not heard so much in Tiger
Bay as it was up to the black conscious movement of the 1960s.
Half-caste was a word I tended to hear more when I left the bay to go to school in Bute
Terrace.
Pupils there from other parts of Cardiff more than once said to me, you're half-caste,
ain't you?
Causually I say, yeah, like after all what is it to you?
Then with my admission would come, well is your mother white?
No, I say.
So your father's white then?
No, again was the reply.
Both my parents are half-caste.
Naturally, I personally could not feel comfortable with such a designation.
After all, who is cast into this world?
I was born, my parents were born, if labels must be placed, why half-caste that reached?
That rather oddball term derived from a European colonialism and misguiding antiquated racialist
philosophy about the alleged division of humanity.
There is no need for the continued usage of such an undignified term as half-caste.
It should be replaced by the complementary terms of Afro-Celtic, Afro-Saxon, Indio-Cumric.
These terms better represent our place in the capital city of modern Wales.
Which is why I began this story by praising the land of my mothers rather than with the
land of my fathers to traditional opening line of the Welsh National Anthem.
Evidence exists to indicate this is not the first time we graced these shores.
Celtic heritage aside, when a person from Tiger Bay fills out an application for a job
that includes an ethnic breakdown, he or she can, for all intents and purposes, practically
say yes to every designated group.
This phenomenon indicates that time is long overdue for those born in Wales and with a
Welsh matriarchal lineage to be recognised as Celtic and for those with obvious African
features to be recognised as Afro-Celtic.
This determination could go without saying for the Indians, Malays, Arabs and all the
different nationalities that settled old Tiger Bay.
And of course by extension for all ethnically intermixed communities throughout the rest
of Britain, more assuredly for those of second and third generation.
An end must be brought once and for all to the lack of acceptance implied in the term
half-caste.
We are Welsh.
Everything that happened to us prior to and throughout this century occurred in Wales.
We are an indelible and recognisable part of Welsh history.
With what had been said before, St Mary Street was becoming off limits to people of colour,
despite its close proximity to target Tiger Bay and the fact that at the time the statue
of Marquis Bute facing the direction of his beloved Docs, it's now located in Callaghan
Street, Callaghan Square.
Opposite the Italian cafe in St Mary Street, which denied service to people of colour,
was the Pavilion Cinema, where Black Bow and their white lady friends spent many an evening
at the pictures.
However, this story isn't all one-sided.
White gents escorted their brown maidens too.
It must be recalled Mr Blackman, a not so tall white gentleman, came down to Moriah
Street, smartly dressed, with his raincoat neatly placed over his right arm to call upon
his dark Venus.
He stood in front of the door and knocked, and when Lydia Hopkins opened the door, there
he stood ready to take her to the pavilion.
We can't go there, she said.
They're not letting black folks in any more.
Auntie Annie Gordon couldn't go there with her black bloat either, which what was there
to do?
It was then, during the 1930s, that everyone down the bay began to go to the Central Cinema
on the Hayes, starting a tradition that was to continue until the 50s.
The Pavilion Cinema, which once banned interracial couples in the 1930s, in the 1950s, was now
to be shook, rattled and rolled by the black American music of Joe Turner, who appeared
in the movie Rock Around the Clock, singing the original version of Shake, Rattle and
Roll, a song which was sung subsequently by Bill Haley and the Comets and various other
white American and British artists.
The invasion of rhythm and blues and rock and roll were taking place as Cardiff Planets
were planning the destruction and uprooting of Tiger Bay.
As I've said, that was an extract from a book I recommend, The Tiger Bay Story by Neil Sinclair.
So the Colour Bar, as we know, as everybody knows, existed.
I say everybody, I mean everybody who's black, mixed-raced or of a generation, let's say.
May not be in the minds of an 18 or 30 year old, but it's certainly in the minds of those
who are much older.
So in the 1930s, the people were good enough to crew the merchant ships, work the docks,
be visited by the people of uptown, white people.
They could visit the docks, but the docks were not allowed to visit them.
So it's important to understand why people might feel resentment, but it's important
to understand too that the Second World War started in the 1930s and it didn't stop those
in quotes, half-caste people for joining the ships, joining the army, being a part of that
war for a country that they were born in and yet would not even allow them a cup of tea
in its tea bars or restaurants, or allow them to go to some of its cinemas.
So all I would say here is this is history, this is reality, the experience of people
from Tiger Bay.
What is important is how they handled that experience, what it meant to them in the long
run.
And in the long run, despite attempted repatriation after World War I and after World War II,
despite not being able to be considered or seen as equal citizens in between the wars,
despite having their homes destroyed and their community ripped apart in the 60s,
they're still here.
Their children are still representing Wales at rugby and football and boxing for Wales and
competing in athletics for Wales.
So I guess the comment made by my uncle when I was a child actually has more meaning now.
And it is we came here, we stayed here, we're not going anywhere.
This is our country.
Now this is merely other than the reading from Neil Sinclair, it's merely my opinion,
not HDAs, but I think it's important to actually understand people.
You might say quite reasonably that history, and it was terrible that that history
made people of an older generation feel like that.
Well, HDA conducted a piece of research recently, very recently, we're talking last few months,
for the Welsh Government.
And these are a couple of the, a few of the headlines from that research.
Research.
People felt discrimination was the most significant factor about being unemployed
and their treatment when employed.
Let me say this was targeted towards Butetown and those of mixed race or their white parents.
Most respondents, whether born in Wales or not, saw themselves as Welsh.
However, half of them, very nearly 50%, I should say, did not feel the rest of society
sees them as being Welsh.
Now 64% of the respondents were born in Wales.
So, it may well be that things have changed, but it is certainly true that a large number of people
don't believe that change is either happening quick enough or is benefiting them.
And they still believe that society in Cardiff, the people uptown, don't want them.
So, if you're having a cup of coffee, or a drink, or a meal in the bars or restaurants on Cardiff,
as it was once, think about it this way.
Uptown has come to the bay.
To do that, it had to knock down half of the village, the community that was Tiger Bay.
Maybe you'd like to look at the history of the community, the people that were in the
was Tiger Bay.
Maybe you'd like to look around and ask a question.
How many of the people that served you, work there, etc., are actually from Bute Town?
This is, after all, walking distance from where they live.
And much of what we're talking about here is historical.
But that isn't.